---
title: "My first blog"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - project1
tags:
  - experiments
  - tests
image: images/my-image.jpg
---
In this post, I explore Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Named Entity Recognition (NER) two core concepts in AI by comparing ChatGPT’s explanations with those from a DataCamp blog post. I aim to see which source offers more clarity and depth for learners interested in data science and machine learning.

Natural Language Processing (NLP)
What is NLP?
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a field of artificial intelligence that enables computers to understand, interpret, and respond to human language. It powers everyday applications such as virtual assistants, translation tools, and chatbots. ChatGPT explained this as the overall field that connects language and computers, giving examples like sentiment analysis and text classification.
Give at least two examples of what the DataCamp blog post explained more clearly or in more detail than ChatGPT:
The DataCamp article provided a more detailed explanation of how NLP models work, mentioning specific techniques like tokenization, stemming, and lemmatization, which ChatGPT only implied but did not describe. It also explained the pipeline of NLP tasks, showing how raw text moves through preprocessing, feature extraction, and model training—offering a more structured, step-by-step understanding than ChatGPT’s summary.
Was there anything ChatGPT got wrong, oversimplified, or missed entirely?
ChatGPT’s explanation was clear but slightly oversimplified the technical process. It didn’t mention the role of embeddings (like word2vec or BERT) or how NLP models actually convert text into numerical vectors for analysis. These are crucial for understanding modern NLP systems.
Did ChatGPT add anything that was missing in the blog?
Yes, ChatGPT provided a more concise and human-like overview, making the concept approachable for beginners. It emphasised practical examples such as email spam detection and translation, which the DataCamp article only touched on briefly.
Which explanation did you find more helpful, and why?
For a beginner-friendly understanding, I found ChatGPT’s explanation more accessible and engaging. However, the DataCamp article offered a richer technical foundation, which is better for learners wanting to understand how NLP algorithms actually function.

Named Entity Recognition (NER)
What is NER?
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a task within NLP that focuses on identifying and classifying entities such as people, locations, organizations, and dates within text. For example, in the sentence “Barack Obama was born in Honolulu,” an NER model would detect “Barack Obama” as a person and “Honolulu” as a location.
Give at least two examples of what the DataCamp blog post explained more clearly or in more detail than ChatGPT:
The DataCamp blog did an excellent job explaining the use cases of NER in real-world contexts, such as in finance (for extracting company names) and healthcare (for identifying medical terms). It also described how NER models are trained, including the use of labeled datasets and machine learning algorithms details ChatGPT did not cover in depth.
Was there anything ChatGPT got wrong, oversimplified, or missed entirely?
ChatGPT slightly oversimplified how NER works, presenting it as a simple extraction task without explaining that models rely on context and sequence labeling (like Conditional Random Fields or Transformer architectures). It also missed discussing evaluation metrics such as precision and recall, which the blog mentioned.
Did ChatGPT add anything that was missing in the blog?
ChatGPT added a clearer and more intuitive definition, making the idea of “extracting key information from text” easy to grasp. It also gave a direct example sentence that illustrated what NER does step-by-step, which made the concept more concrete.
Which explanation did you find more helpful, and why?
I found the DataCamp blog post more helpful for understanding the technical and practical depth of NER. However, ChatGPT’s version was better for quickly grasping the core idea without getting lost in details. Ideally, combining both sources gives the most complete understanding: ChatGPT for clarity and DataCamp for depth.
